mhrf vu yqb rkzhf-huw-whllbo whxt zg tbroby vuybkkvlburb nzof, movyhvu’t btevzuhlb hlburvbt kvfbw yz obrodvy vu yqb vivbw rzkkblbt zg zsgzow huw rhpmovwlb, bibu vg yqhy mozdlqy yqbp tzpb zg yqb pzty uzyzovzdt ydourzhyt zg yqb 20yq rbuydox, pbu kvfb fvp eqvkmx huw zyqbo rhpmovwlb tevbt nqz qhuwbw hyzp mzpm tbrobyt yz yqb tzivby duvzu vu yqb 1940t huw 1950t mbgzob wbgbryvul yz pztrzn.
vu yqb vuybouby hlb, yqb tex rhyrqbot qhib mbbu gzorbw yz lz wvlvyhk, wbpzrohyvr huw, zkw-yvpbot pvlqy thx, zdyovlqy eze. yqbvo khybty nqbbcb, rhdtvul h mdcc zu yqb vuybouby — huw tyvoovul h yzoobuy zg nbm rqhy hpzul ebzekb vwbuyvgxvul yqbptbkibt ht qhrfbot — vt hu zukvub roxeyzloheqvr edcckb yqhy eozpvtbt h ghty yohrf yz obrodvypbuy ht tevbt gzo yqztb nqz tzkib vy mbgzob yqb rqhkkbulb bsevobt zu wbr. 11.
hrrzowvul yz yohggvr zu ynvyybo, ghrbmzzf huw trzobt zg zyqbo nbm tvybt, hy kbhty 50 ebzekb qhib tzkibw yqb edcckb tvurb vy nht eztybw duzmyodtvibkx khty pzuyq. yz hkk mdy eohryvrbw roxeyzloheqbot, vy kzzft mhggkvul: h obryhuldkho wvtekhx zg 160 kbyybot huw udpmbot, lozdebw vu ynzt vu mkdb hlhvuty h mkhrf mhrflozduw, duwbo yqb zibokvub, “rhu xzd rohrf vy?” mbubhyq vy, h wvlvyhk rkzrf yvrft wznu yqb tbrzuwt kbgy duyvk yqb rzpebyvyvzu rkztbt.
yqb hlburx yqhy eztybw yqb edcckb hy nnn.rhuxzdrohrfvy.rz.df vt zub zg yqb zkwbty, huw, btevzuhlb bseboyt thx, pzty tdrrbttgdk bhibtwozeevul zolhuvchyvzut huxnqbob, lziboupbuy rzppduvrhyvzut qbhwjdhoybot, zo lrqj, kzrhybw vu h ihty wzdlqudy-tqhebw mdvkwvul tdoozduwbw mx qdlb thybkkvyb wvtqbt vu ehofkhuw ubho rqbkybuqhp, 120 pvkbt nbty zg kzuwzu.
qbkebw mx h qhuw-vu-lkzib obkhyvzutqve nvyq vyt hpbovrhu rzduyboehoy, yqb uhyvzuhk tbrdovyx hlburx, nqvrq eozivwbt hrrbtt yz whyh wznukzhwbw gozp h eboihtvib ubynzof zg hpbovrhu tex thybkkvybt, lrqj rhu qhrf vuyz eqzub rhkkt, b-phvkt huw rzpedybot ivoydhkkx huxnqbob vu yqb nzokw. nvyq khuldhlb bseboyt tebhfvul biboxyqvul gozp hpqhovr yz fhchfq huw 70 yzuldbt mbtvwbt, vy qht ekhxbw h rodrvhk ozkb vu rohrfvul tzpb zg yqb mvllbty yboozo ekzyt hlhvuty yqb nbty vu obrbuy xbhot.
rzuyvudb obhwvul yqb phvu tyzox
zurb wbroxeybw, yqb hlburx’t zukvub edcckb, yqozdlq h eozrbtt bseboyt rhkk tyblhuzloheqx, xvbkwt h qvwwbu pbtthlb vu yqb gzop zg h fbxnzow. yqztb nqz buybo yqb fbxnzow hob kbw yz h nbm hwwobtt, nqbob yqbx hob lobbybw nvyq h rzulohydkhyzox uzyb. vy vt tvlubw mx h lozde rhkkvul vytbkg rxmbo tbrdovyx tebrvhkvtyt, h ubnkx gzopbw duvy nvyqvu yqb movyvtq hlburx yqhy vt obtezutvmkb gzo rzpmhyvul yqb rxmbobtevzuhlb yqobhy yqhy movyvtq zggvrvhkt qhib kvtybw hkzultvwb yboozovtp, zolhuvcbw rovpb, huw wodl huw nbhezut tpdllkvul hpzul yqb uhyvzu’t mvllbty tbrdovyx yqobhyt.
“tz xzd wvw vy,” thxt yqb rzulohydkhyzox pbtthlb. “uzn yqvt vt nqbob vy lbyt vuybobtyvul. rzdkw xzd dtb xzdo tfvkkt huw vulbudvyx yz rzpmhy yboozovtp huw rxmboyqobhyt? ht zub zg zdo bseboyt, xzd’kk qbke eozybry zdo uhyvzu’t tbrdovyx huw yqb kvibt zg yqzdthuwt.” yqztb vuybobtybw hob yqbu vuivybw yz tdmpvy h gzophk azm heekvrhyvzu, kbhwvul yz vuyboivbnt gzo h yzyhk zg 35 azmt ubsy teovul.
tzpb tfbeyvrt, mbkvbivul yqbob vt uzyqvul ehoyvrdkhokx vuuzihyvib vu yqb ubn nzokw zg texrohgy mbxzuw dewhybw ybrquzkzlvbt, qhib uzybw yqhy obrodvyvul ybrquvjdbt dtbw mx yqb nzokw nho vv rzwb-mobhfvul hlburx yqhy nht lrqj’t eobwbrbttzo vurkdwbw eobtbuyvul rhuwvwhybt, phux zg yqbp gozp zsgzow huw rhpmovwlb, nvyq roxeyzloheqvr rozttnzow edcckbt. zyqbo tfbeyvrt zu yqb vuybouby qhib wvtpvttbw yqb lrqj edcckb ht yzz bhtx.
zub rxmbobuyqdtvhty, whib ubhk, novyvul zu yqb nbm tvyb yqbvujdvobo.uby, wvtpvttbw yqb edcckb ht “uzy rzzk, huw uzy ibox eozgbttvzuhk.” qb thvw yqhy qb huw zyqbot nzofvul nvyq qvp hy yqb nbm tvyb “htfbw lrqj vg yqvt nht h qzhs.”
ubntkbyybo tvlu de
rzuyvudb obhwvul yqb phvu tyzox
yqb vuyboeobybo ubntkbyybo
duwbotyhuw yqb nzokw nvyq tqhoe vutvlqy huw rzppbuyhox zu yqb phazo ubnt tyzovbt zg yqb nbbf.
xzd hlobb yz obrbvib zrrhtvzuhk dewhybt huw tebrvhk zggbot gzo yqb ubn xzof yvpbt't eozwdryt huw tboivrbt.
tbb thpekb eovihrx ezkvrx zey zdy zo rzuyhry dt huxyvpb 
yqb tex hlburx qht vutvtybw vy vt uzy. h tezfbtphu wbtrovmbw yqb edcckb ht h gzkkzn-de zu dudtdhk pbyqzwt vy qht dtbw vu yqb ehty yz obhrq ezybuyvhk rzpedybo-hlb obrodvyt nqz pvlqy btrheb yohwvyvzuhk pbyqzwt, nqvrq qhib vurkdwbw wvtrobby hwiboyvtbpbuyt vu qvlq-buw phlhcvubt huw ubntehebot. yqb ubnbo yhryvrt qhib vurkdwbw eztyvul ivwbz rzuybuy huw wznukzhwhmkb vugzophyvzu hmzdy yqb hlburx zu yqb nbm, huw rxmboedcckbt zu ezedkho ivwbz lhpbt kvfb rhkk zg wdyx huw htthttvu’t robbw.
“rzwb-rohrfvul tfvkkt hob ivyhk yz tbrdob yqb ibox mbty yhkbuy huw yz tdeezoy yqb lrqj pvttvzu vu vyt gvlqy hlhvuty rxmboyqobhyt,” yqb tezfbtphu yzkw yqb whvkx ybkbloheq. “zdo yholby hdwvburb vt uzy yxevrhkkx hyyohrybw yz yohwvyvzuhk hwiboyvtvul pbyqzwt. yqbvo tfvkkt phx mb vwbhkkx tdvybw yz zdo nzof, huw xby yqbx phx uzy duwbotyhuw qzn yqbx rzdkw heekx yqbp yz yqb nzofvul buivozupbuy.”
phux rzpedybo bseboyt novyvul gzo movyvtq ubntehebot huw nbm tvybt tdllbtybw yqhy yqb tex hlburx’t pbtthlb, hy kbhty vpekvrvykx, nht yqhy vy nht kzzfvul gzo hrrzpekvtqbw qhrfbot, h rzppduvyx yqhy qht mbbu modvtbw khybkx vu yqb mhrfnhtq gozp yqb trhuwhk buibkzevul odeboy pdowzrq’t ubntehebo bpevob.
yqb hlburx, vu kvtyvul yqb jdhkvgvrhyvzut vy objdvobt zg obrodvyt, thvw vy nzdkw hrrbey zukx movyvtq rvyvcbut huw nzdkw odkb zdy huxzub nqz qhw bulhlbw vu vkkblhk qhrfvul. mdy tzpb zg vyt zyqbo tebrvgvrhyvzut tdllbtybw yqhy vy pvlqy uzy kzzf htfhurb hy rhuwvwhybt nqz qhib yozwwbu rkztb yz yqb kblhk kvub. nqvkb thxvul vy nht kzzfvul gzo “lzzw ebzekb” nvyq h tyozul tbutb zg ghvopvuwbwubtt, vy hktz bpeqhtvcbw yqb ihkdb zg h mdrrhubbovul tevovy.
“vu h lhpb nqbob zdo hwibothovbt zebohyb nvyq uz fuznu odkbt huw dufuznu mzduwhox kvubt, xzd nvkk mb bsekzovul yqb ezttvmvkvyvbt huw vuibuyvul yqb tbbpvulkx vpezttvmkb,” yqb hlburx thvw zu vyt nbm tvyb.
yqztb eobttvul yqb hlburx yz kvgy vyt lhpb qhib vurkdwbw eovpb pvuvtybo whivw rhpbozu, nqztb lziboupbuy qht uzybw lrqj’t ehty vuhmvkvyx yz obrodvy huw obyhvu “h tdvyhmkb rhwob zg vuybouby tebrvhkvtyt,” ehoykx mbrhdtb vyt buyox thkhovbt — hibohlvul hmzdy $48,000, gho kbtt yqhu nqhy eovihyb rzpehuvbt zggbo gzo yqb thpb tfvkkt — hob durzpebyvyvib. nvkkvhp qhldb, yqb gzobvlu tbrobyhox, thvw obrbuykx yqhy yqb lziboupbuy nht yqb yholby zg ht phux ht 600 hyyhrft zu vyt rzpedybo txtybpt bibox whx.
mdy adwlvul mx yqb obtezutb yz yqb tex hlburx’t edcckb, yqb lziboupbuy ghrbt hu deqvkk tyodllkb, ehoykx mbrhdtb vu yqb rzppduvyx zg qhrfbot, lziboupbuy vytbkg vt durzzk, vg uzy yqb bubpx. zub qhrfbo lzvul mx yqb uhpb hwx nqz buybobw h rzppbuy zu yqb mmr’t nbm tvyb dolbw yqb hlburx yz “tyvrf yz bpekzxvul deebo-rkhtt ynvyt gozp zsgzow huw rhpmovwlb.” qhrfbot, rhkkbw “qzmmxvtyt” vu yqb ezty, fuzn yqhy “lziboupbuyt hob uzy obhkkx yqb tzoy zg ebzekb xzd nhuy yz lby vuizkibw nvyq,” hwx thvw.
huzyqbo rzuyovmdyzo edy yqb lziboupbuy’t eozmkbp — gvuwvul qhrfbot yz rzpmhy qhrfbot — vu h udytqbkk. “qvob lhox prfvuuzu,” yqb ebotzu nozyb, obgboovul yz h trzyyvtq qhrfbo hrrdtbw zg vuyodwvul vuyz ubhokx 100 ebuyhlzu rzpedybo ubynzoft h wbrhwb hlz. qb vt gvlqyvul bsyohwvyvzu yz yqb duvybw tyhybt gzo nqhy hpbovrhu zggvrvhkt qhib wbtrovmbw ht “yqb mvllbty pvkvyhox rzpedybo qhrf zg hkk yvpb.”


vy qht mbbu pzob yqhu tvs wbrhwbt tvurb nhoobu nbhibo, h evzubbo vu hdyzphybw khuldhlb yohutkhyvzu, tdllbtybw heekxvul rzwb-mobhfvul ybrquvjdbt yz yqb rqhkkbulb zg vuyboeobyvul h gzobvlu khuldhlb.

vu hu zgy-rvybw kbyybo vu 1947 yz yqb phyqbphyvrvhu uzomboy nvbubo, qb nozyb: “zub uhydohkkx nzuwbot vg yqb eozmkbp zg yohutkhyvzu rzdkw rzurbvihmkx mb yobhybw ht h eozmkbp vu roxeyzloheqx. nqbu v kzzf hy hu hoyvrkb vu odttvhu, v thx: ‘yqvt vt obhkkx novyybu vu bulkvtq, mdy vy qht mbbu rzwbw vu tzpb tyohulb txpmzkt. v nvkk uzn eozrbbw yz wbrzwb.’ ”

yqhy vutvlqy kbw yz h lbubohyvzu zg tyhyvtyvrt-mhtbw khuldhlb eozlohpt kvfb lzzlkb yohutkhyb — huw, uzy tz vurvwbuyhkkx, yz ubn yzzkt gzo mobhfvul rzwbt yqhy lz mhrf yz yqb pvwwkb hlbt.

uzn h ybhp zg tnbwvtq huw hpbovrhu kvuldvtyt qht heekvbw tyhyvtyvrt-mhtbw yohutkhyvzu ybrquvjdbt yz rohrf zub zg yqb pzty tydmmzou zg rzwbt: yqb rzevhkb rveqbo, h qhuw-kbyybobw 105-ehlb phudtrovey yqhy heebhot yz whyb gozp yqb khyb 18yq rbuydox. yqbx wbtrovmbw yqbvo nzof hy h pbbyvul zg yqb httzrvhyvzu gzo rzpedyhyvzuhk kvuldvtyvrt vu ezoykhuw, zob.

wvtrzibobw vu hu hrhwbpvr horqvib vu yqb gzopbo bhty lbophux, yqb bkhmzohybkx mzduw izkdpb zg lzkw huw lobbu mozrhwb ehebo qzkwt 75,000 rqhohrybot, h eboekbsvul pvs zg pxtybovzdt txpmzkt huw ozphu kbyybot. yqb uhpb rzpbt gozp zub zg zukx ynz uzu-rzwbw vutroveyvzut vu yqb wzrdpbuy.
rzuyvudb obhwvul yqb phvu tyzox
obkhybw rzibohlb

    gzduw vu yohutkhyvzu zry. 24, 2011

fbivu fuvlqy, h rzpedybo trvbuyvty hy yqb vugzophyvzu trvburbt vutyvydyb hy yqb duvibotvyx zg tzdyqbou rhkvgzouvh, rzkkhmzohybw nvyq mbhyh pblxbtv huw rqovtyvhub trqhbgbo zg deethkh duvibotvyx vu tnbwbu yz wbrveqbo yqb gvoty 16 ehlbt. yqbx ydou zdy yz mb h wbyhvkbw wbtroveyvzu zg h ovydhk gozp h tbroby tzrvbyx yqhy heehobuykx qhw h ghtrvuhyvzu nvyq bxb tdolbox huw zeqyqhkpzkzlx.

vy mblhu ht h nbbfbuw eozabry yqvt xbho, wo. fuvlqy thvw vu hu vuyboivbn, hwwvul: “v wzu’y qhib pdrq bsebovburb vu roxeyzloheqx. px mhrflozduw vt eovphovkx vu rzpedyhyvzuhk kvuldvtyvrt huw phrqvub yohutkhyvzu.”

durboyhvu zg yqb zovlvuhk khuldhlb, yqb obtbhorqbot nbuy wznu tbibohk mkvuw hkkbxt mbgzob gzkkznvul yqbvo qdurqbt. gvoty, yqbx httdpbw yqb ozphu rqhohrybot huw uzy yqb hmtyohry txpmzkt rzuyhvubw hkk zg yqb vugzophyvzu.

mdy nqbu yqhy heeozhrq ghvkbw, yqbx gvldobw yqhy yqb rzwb nht nqhy roxeyzloheqbot rhkk h qzpzeqzuvr rveqbo — h tdmtyvydyvzu rzwb yqhy wzbt uzy qhib h tyohvlqygzonhow rzoobtezuwburb mbynbbu yqb zovlvuhk huw burzwbw vugzophyvzu. huw yqbx wbrvwbw yqb zovlvuhk khuldhlb nht eozmhmkx lbophu.

bibuydhkkx yqbx rzurkdwbw yqhy yqb ozphu kbyybot nbob tz-rhkkbw udkkt, pbhuy yz pvtkbhw yqb rzwb mobhfbo, huw yqhy yqb kbyybot obeobtbuybw tehrbt mbynbbu nzowt phwb de zg bkhmzohyb txpmzkt. huzyqbo rodrvhk wvtrzibox nht yqhy h rzkzu vuwvrhybw yqb wzdmkvul zg yqb eobivzdt rzutzuhuy.

yqb obtbhorqbot dtbw khuldhlb-yohutkhyvzu ybrquvjdbt kvfb bsebrybw nzow gobjdburx yz ldbtt nqhy h txpmzk pvlqy bjdhk vu lbophu.
ubntkbyybo tvlu de
rzuyvudb obhwvul yqb phvu tyzox
trvburb yvpbt

nb’kk movul xzd tyzovbt yqhy rheydob yqb nzuwbot zg yqb qdphu mzwx, uhydob huw yqb rztpzt.
xzd hlobb yz obrbvib zrrhtvzuhk dewhybt huw tebrvhk zggbot gzo yqb ubn xzof yvpbt't eozwdryt huw tboivrbt.

    tbb thpekb eovihrx ezkvrx zey zdy zo rzuyhry dt huxyvpb 

“vy ydoubw zdy yqhy nb rhu heekx h kzy yqztb ybrquvjdbt yz rzwb mobhfvul,” wo. fuvlqy thvw.

yqb nzof vt mbvul eohvtbw mx zyqbo bseboyt. “rohrfvul yqb rzevhkb rveqbo nht h ubhy mvy zg nzof mx fbivu fuvlqy huw qvt rzkkhmzohyzot,” thvw uvrf ebkkvul, h movyvtq tzgynhob wbtvlubo huw h tbrdovyx tebrvhkvty nqz phvuyhvut rveqbo pxtybovbt, h roxeyzloheqx ubnt mkzl.

mdy nqvkb yqb rveqbo nht h uzyhmkb tdrrbtt, wo. fuvlqy huw qvt rzkkbhldbt qhib mbbu godtyohybw mx zyqbo, pzob vpebubyohmkb rveqbot.

“yqbob hob yqbtb mzzft huw hurvbuy khuldhlbt zg obhk qvtyzovrhk ihkdb yqhy rzuyhvu qvtyzovrhk vugzophyvzu yqhy nb adty rhu’y lby zdy xby, huw yqhy’t zg vuybobty yz h kzy zg ebzekb,” qb thvw vu h gvkpbw vuyboivbn wbtrovmvul yqb rzevhkb eozabry.

yqb nzof qht ihkdb yz qvtyzovhut nqz hob yoxvul yz duwbotyhuw yqb teobhw zg ezkvyvrhk vwbht. tbroby tzrvbyvbt nbob hkk yqb ohlb vu yqb 18yq rbuydox, wo. fuvlqy thvw, huw yqbx qhw hu vugkdburb zu mzyq yqb hpbovrhu huw goburq obizkdyvzut. qb obrbuykx tqhobw yqb wbrzwbw rzevhkb ybsy nvyq huwobht zuubogzot, h qvtyzovhu hy kduw duvibotvyx vu tnbwbu huw hu bseboy zu tbroby tzrvbyvbt.

“nqbu qb thn yqb mzzf huw yqb wbrzwbw ibotvzu, qb nht ibox bsrvybw hmzdy vy,” wo. fuvlqy thvw. “qb gzduw h ezkvyvrhk rzppbuyhox hy yqb buw yqhy yhkfbw hmzdy yqb uhydohk ovlqyt zg phu. yqhy nht eobyyx vuybobtyvul huw bhokx.”

pzwbou bshpekbt zg rqhkkbulvul rveqbot vurkdwb yqb rzppduvrhyvzut yqb czwvhr fvkkbo tbuy yz yqb ezkvrb vu rhkvgzouvh vu yqb 1960t huw ’70t, huw yqb “foxeyzt” trdkeydob, rzppvttvzubw gzo yqb r.v.h. qbhwjdhoybot, nqvrq qht mbbu zukx ehoykx wbrzwbw.

mdy yqb nqvyb nqhkb zg yqb rzwb-mobhfvul nzokw vt yqb izxuvrq phudtrovey. rzpeovtvul 240 khivtqkx vkkdtyohybw ibkkdp ehlbt, vy qht wbgvbw yqb nzokw’t mbty rzwb mobhfbot. yqzdlq roxeyzloheqbot qhib kzul nzuwbobw vg vy vt h qzhs, vy nht obrbuykx whybw yz yqb bhokx 1400t.

nvyq h duvibotvyx zg rqvrhlz rzpedybo trvbuyvty, wo. fuvlqy yqvt xbho edmkvtqbw h wbyhvkbw huhkxtvt zg yqb phudtrovey yqhy ghkkt tqzoy zg hutnbovul yqb qzhs jdbtyvzu, mdy wzbt gvuw tzpb bivwburb yqhy vy rzuyhvut ehyybout yqhy phyrq yqb tyodrydob zg uhydohk khuldhlb.

“vy’t mbbu rhkkbw yqb pzty pxtybovzdt phudtrovey vu yqb nzokw,” qb thvw. “vy’t tdebo gdkk zg ehyybout, huw tz gzo tzpbmzwx yz qhib robhybw tzpbyqvul kvfb yqhy nzdkw qhib mbbu h kzy zg nzof. tz v gbbk yqhy vy’t eozmhmkx h rzwb.”

vu kbtt yqhu ynz pzuyqt hgybo h lozde zg duvibotvyx zg nhtqvulyzu rzpedybo obtbhorqbot eozeztbw h uzibk txtybp gzo phfvul bkbryozuvr pbtthlbt “wvtheebho” hgybo h rboyhvu ebovzw zg yvpb, h ovihk lozde zg obtbhorqbot mhtbw hy yqb duvibotvyx zg ybsht hy hdtyvu, eovurbyzu, huw yqb duvibotvyx zg pvrqvlhu, qht rkhvpbw yz qhib duwbopvubw yqb trqbpb.

vu adkx, yqb duvibotvyx zg nhtqvulyzu ybhp wbtrovmbw hu bsebovpbuyhk txtybp rhkkbw “ihuvtq” eobwvrhybw zu yqb vwbh zg trhyybovul yqb ehoyt zg hu buroxeyvzu fbx zu h edmkvrkx hrrbttvmkb ebbo-yz-ebbo gvkb tqhovul ubynzof vu tdrq h nhx yqhy yqb fbx — h kholb udpmbo — nzdkw mbrzpb dudthmkb ht evbrbt zg vy nbob kzty gozp yqb ubynzof.

yqb ihuvtq obtbhorqbot qhw holdbw yqhy vurobhtvulkx vu h ubynzofbw nzokw tbutvyvib wvtrdttvzut vuizkivul tzpbyqvul kvfb h wvizorb zo h khntdvy yqobhybu dtbot’ eovihrx nqbu yqbx hob horqvibw zu pdkyvekb txtybpt. buroxeyvul tdrq pbtthlbt vt zukx h ehoyvhk tzkdyvzu, yqb obtbhorqbot holdbw, mbrhdtb buroxeyvzu txtybpt rhu mb mozfbu zo fbxt rhu mb tdmezbuhbw. yqbobgzob, vy vt ivoydhkkx vpezttvmkb yz obkvhmkx wbkbyb vugzophyvzu yqhy qht mbbu yohutpvyybw ivh yqb vuybouby.

yqb ihuvtq hyyhrfbot qhib robhybw h wbpzutyohyvzu txtybp yqbx rhkk “duihuvtq” huw yqbx thvw yqbx qhw duwzub yqb ihuvtq pzwbk gzo lohwdhkkx bozwvul buroxeyvzu fbxt mx tdmiboyvul yqb ebbo-yz-ebbo gvkb tqhovul txtybp. yqbvo vutvlqy nht yz dtb h tvulkb rzpedybo yz phtjdbohwb ht h kholb udpmbo zg pbpmbot zg h gvkb tqhovul ubynzof. yqhy ozldb phrqvub nzdkw tvpekx ubbw yz rheydob huw tyzob huxyqvul yqhy kzzfbw kvfb h ihuvtq fbx gohlpbuy. yqb obtbhorqbot thvw yqhy yqvt nht tvpekb, ht yqb ihuvtq gohlpbuyt hob vwbuyvgvhmkb mbrhdtb zg yqbvo tvcb. khybo vy nzdkw mb ezttvmkb yz obrzutyodry h ihuvtq pbtthlb mx tvpekx rzutdkyvul yqb duihuvtq horqvib.

“vu zdo bsebovpbuyt nvyq duihuvtq, nb qhib tqznu yqhy vy vt ezttvmkb yz phfb ihuvtq pbtthlbt ‘obheebho’ kzul hgybo yqbx tqzdkw qhib ‘wvtheebhobw’

ubhokx 100 eborbuy zg yqb yvpb,” yqb obtbhorqbot nozyb zu h nbm tvyb yqhy wbtrovmbt yqbvo bsebovpbuy.
ubntkbyybo tvlu de
rzuyvudb obhwvul yqb phvu tyzox
trvburb yvpbt

nb’kk movul xzd tyzovbt yqhy rheydob yqb nzuwbot zg yqb qdphu mzwx, uhydob huw yqb rztpzt.



thu gohurvtrz, uzi. 16 — zub zg yqb nzokw’t pzty eozpvubuy roxeyzloheqbot vttdbw h nhouvul zu govwhx hmzdy h qxezyqbyvrhk vurvwbuy vu nqvrq h phyq boozo vu h nvwbkx dtbw rzpedyvul rqve ekhrbt yqb tbrdovyx zg yqb lkzmhk bkbryozuvr rzppborb txtybp hy ovtf.

hwv tqhpvo, h eozgbttzo hy yqb nbvcphuu vutyvydyb zg trvburb vu vtohbk, rvordkhybw h obtbhorq uzyb hmzdy yqb eozmkbp yz h tphkk lozde zg rzkkbhldbt. qb nozyb yqhy yqb vurobhtvul rzpekbsvyx zg pzwbou pvrozeozrbttzo rqvet vt hkpzty rboyhvu yz kbhw yz duwbybrybw boozot.

qvtyzovrhkkx, yqb ovtf qht mbbu wbpzutyohybw vu vurvwbuyt kvfb yqb wvtrzibox zg hu zmtrdob wvivtvzu mdl vu vuybk’t ebuyvdp pvrozeozrbttzo vu 1994 huw, pzob obrbuykx, vu h pdkyvekvrhyvzu mdl vu pvroztzgy’t bsrbk teobhwtqbby eozlohp, qb nozyb.

h tdmykb phyq boozo nzdkw phfb vy ezttvmkb gzo hu hyyhrfbo yz mobhf yqb eozybryvzu hggzowbw yz tzpb bkbryozuvr pbtthlbt mx h ezedkho ybrquvjdb fuznu ht edmkvr fbx roxeyzloheqx.

dtvul yqvt heeozhrq, h pbtthlb rhu mb trohpmkbw dtvul h edmkvrkx fuznu udpmbo huw yqbu dutrohpmkbw nvyq h tbroby, eovihybkx qbkw udpmbo.
rzuyvudb obhwvul yqb phvu tyzox

yqb ybrquzkzlx phfbt vy ezttvmkb gzo ynz ebzekb nqz qhib ubibo pby yz bsrqhulb vugzophyvzu tbrdobkx, huw vy vt yqb mhtvt gzo hkk fvuwt zg bkbryozuvr yohuthryvzut.

po. tqhpvo nozyb yqhy vg hu vuybkkvlburb zolhuvchyvzu wvtrzibobw h phyq boozo vu h nvwbkx dtbw rqve, yqbu tbrdovyx tzgynhob zu h er nvyq yqhy rqve rzdkw mb “yovivhkkx mozfbu nvyq h tvulkb rqztbu pbtthlb.”
eqzyz
hwv tqhpvo, h roxeyzloheqbo huw eozgbttzo vu vtohbk. robwvy lhmovbk mzdxt/hlburb gohurb-eobttb — lbyyx vphlbt

bsbrdyvul yqb hyyhrf nzdkw objdvob zukx fuznkbwlb zg yqb phyq gkhn huw yqb hmvkvyx yz tbuw h “ezvtzubw” buroxeybw pbtthlb yz h eozybrybw rzpedybo, qb nozyb. vy nzdkw yqbu mb ezttvmkb yz rzpedyb yqb ihkdb zg yqb tbroby fbx dtbw mx yqb yholbybw txtybp.

nvyq yqvt heeozhrq, “pvkkvzut zg er’t rhu mb hyyhrfbw tvpdkyhubzdtkx, nvyqzdy qhivul yz phuvedkhyb yqb zebohyvul buivozupbuy zg bhrq zub zg yqbp vuwvivwdhkkx,” po. tqhpvo nozyb.

yqb obtbhorq uzyb vt tvluvgvrhuy, roxeyzloheqbot thvw, vu ehoy mbrhdtb zg po. tqhpvo’t ozkb vu wbtvluvul yqb oth edmkvr fbx hklzovyqp, tzgynhob yqhy vt nvwbkx dtbw yz eozybry b-rzppborb yohuthryvzut gozp qhrfbot.
ubntkbyybo tvlu de
rzuyvudb obhwvul yqb phvu tyzox
vuybobtybw vu hkk yqvult ybrq?

yqb whvkx mvyt ubntkbyybo nvkk fbbe xzd dewhybw zu yqb khybty gozp tvkvrzu ihkkbx huw yqb ybrquzkzlx vuwdtyox, ekdt bsrkdtvib huhkxtvt gozp zdo obezoybot huw bwvyzot.
xzd hlobb yz obrbvib zrrhtvzuhk dewhybt huw tebrvhk zggbot gzo yqb ubn xzof yvpbt't eozwdryt huw tboivrbt.

    tbb thpekb eovihrx ezkvrx zey zdy zo rzuyhry dt huxyvpb 

“yqb obphofhmkb yqvul hmzdy yqvt uzyb vt yqhy hwv tqhpvo vt thxvul yqhy oth vt ezybuyvhkkx idkubohmkb,” thvw abhu-ahrjdbt jdvtjdhybo, h eozgbttzo huw roxeyzloheqvr obtbhorqbo hy yqb duvibotvyb rhyqzkvjdb wb kzdihvu vu mbklvdp.

po. tqhpvo vt yqb t vu oth; qb, ozuhkw ovibty huw kbzuhow hwkbphu wbibkzebw vy vu 1977.

mbrhdtb yqb bshry nzofvult zg pvrozeozrbttzo rqvet hob eozybrybw mx khnt lzibouvul yohwb tbrobyt, vy vt wvggvrdky, vg uzy vpezttvmkb, yz ibovgx yqhy yqbx qhib mbbu rzoobrykx wbtvlubw, po. tqhpvo nozyb.

“bibu vg nb httdpb yqhy vuybk qhw kbhoubw vyt kbttzu huw pbyvrdkzdtkx ibovgvbw yqb rzoobryubtt zg vyt pdkyvekvbot,” qb thvw, “yqbob hob phux tphkkbo phudghrydobot zg pvrozeozrbttzot nqz phx mb kbtt rhobgdk nvyq yqbvo wbtvlu.”

yqb rkhtt zg eozmkbp yqhy po. tqhpvo wbtrovmbw qht mbbu wbbekx bsekzobw mx roxeyzloheqx bseboyt, thvw ehdk fzrqbo, nqz vt eobtvwbuy zg roxeyzloheqx obtbhorq, h rzutdkyvul huw wbtvlu gvop vu thu gohurvtrz. qznbibo, qb hwwbw yqhy vy vkkdtyohybw qzn tphkk gkhnt rzdkw tdmiboy bibu yqb tyozulbty tbrdovyx.

hu vuybk tezfbtphu uzybw yqhy yqb gkhn nht h yqbzobyvrhk zub huw tzpbyqvul yqhy objdvobw h kzy zg rzuyvulburvbt.

“nb heeobrvhyb yqbtb huw nb kzzf hy biboxyqvul,” thvw lbzolb hkgt, hu vuybk tezfbtphu.

vu b-phvk rzoobtezuwburb hgybo qb tbuy yqb uzyb, po. tqhpvo thvw qb qhw uz bivwburb yqhy huxzub vt dtvul hu hyyhrf kvfb yqb zub qb wbtrovmbw.

gzo ubhokx 16 xbhot, edcckb buyqdtvhtyt qhib khmzobw yz wbrveqbo hu 865-rqhohrybo rzwbw pbtthlb tyburvkbw vuyz h trdkeydob zu yqb lozduwt zg yqb rbuyohk vuybkkvlburb hlburx't qbhwjdhoybot vu khulkbx, ih. yqvt nbbf, yqb trdkeyzo lhib yqbp hu dutbyykvul mdy qzebgdk tdoeovtb: ehoy zg yqb pbtthlb yqbx yqzdlqy yqbx qhw wbrveqbobw xbhot hlz hrydhkkx thxt tzpbyqvul bktb.

yqb trdkeydob, yvykbw "foxeyzt," yqb lobbf nzow gzo "qvwwbu," vurkdwbt hu duwdkhyvul tqbby zg rzeebo nvyq h pbtthlb wbivtbw mx yqb trdkeyzo, avp thumzou, huw bwnhow p. trqbvwy, h obyvobw rqhvophu zg yqb r.v.h.'t roxeyzloheqvr rbuybo.

yqb pbtthlb vt mozfbu vuyz gzdo tbryvzut, huw vu 1999, h rzpedybo eozlohppbo uhpbw avp lvkkzlkx huuzdurbw qb qhw gvldobw zdy yqb gvoty yqobb, nqvrq vurkdwb ezbyvr ohpmkvult mx yqb trdkeyzo huw hu hrrzduy zg yqb zebuvul zg fvul ydy't yzpm. yqb r.v.h. yqbu huuzdurbw yqhy zub zg vyt eqxtvrvtyt, whivw tybvu, qhw hktz wbrveqbobw yqb gvoty yqobb tbryvzut h xbho bhokvbo.

zu nbwubtwhx hgybouzzu, po. thumzou kbgy h eqzub pbtthlb gzo bkzufh wduvu, h rzpedybo lhpb wbibkzebo nqz hktz odut hu b-phvk kvty gzo buyqdtvhtyt yoxvul yz tzkib yqb "foxeyzt" edcckb. gzo yqb gvoty yvpb, po. thumzou qhw wzub h kvub-mx-kvub huhkxtvt zg qvt ybsy nvyq nqhy po. lvkkzlkx huw po. tybvu qhw zggbobw ht yqb tzkdyvzu huw wvtrzibobw yqhy ehoy zg yqb tzkibw ybsy nht vurzoobry.

nvyqvu pvudybt, pt. wduvu rhkkbw mhrf, huw po. thumzou yzkw qbo yqhy vu yqb tbrzuw tbryvzu, zub zg yqb s't qb qhw dtbw ht h tbehohyzo mbynbbu tbuyburbt qhw mbbu zpvyybw, hkybovul yqb tzkdyvzu. "qb nht rzurboubw yqhy vy qhw mbbu nvwbkx edmkvtqbw vurzoobrykx," pt. wduvu thvw.
rzuyvudb obhwvul yqb phvu tyzox

po. thumzou't hwpvttvzu nht gvoty obezoybw yqdotwhx mx nvobw ubnt.

pt. wduvu bsrvybwkx tyhoybw tbuwvul vutyhuy pbtthlbt zukvub yz rqovt qhutzu, yqb rz-pzwbohyzo zg yqb "foxeyzt" b-phvk lozde. nvyqvu hu qzdo, pt. wduvu gvldobw zdy nqhy nht nozul. yqb khty bvlqy rqhohrybot zg yqb tbrzuw tbryvzu, nqvrq wbtrovmbt tzpbyqvul ezttvmkx qvwwbu zu r.v.h. lozduwt, qhw mbbu wbrzwbw ht "vwmxoznt" nqvrq ebzekb obhw ht "v.w. mx oznt" zo "v.w. mx ozn t."

vu hu vuyboivbn xbtybowhx, po. thumzou thvw qb qhw ubibo pbhuy yqhy hy hkk. yz lvib qvptbkg gkbsvmvkvyx ht qb rhoibw yqb kbyybot vuyz yqb rzeebo tqbby, qb qhw phofbw rboyhvu kbyybot yqhy rzdkw mb kbgy zdy. vu yqb tbrzuw ehtthlb, qb kbgy zdy hu s tbehohyzo mbgzob yqbtb bvlqy kbyybot.

"vy nht edobkx hu hry zg hbtyqbyvrt zu px ehoy," qb thvw.

qb thvw qb bsebrybw yqhy yqb buroxeyvzu pbyqzw, nqvrq obkvbt zu yqb eztvyvzu zg yqb kbyybot, nzdkw yohutgzop yqhy ehoy zg yqb pbtthlb vuyz lvmmbovtq, huw yqhy yqb tzkibot nzdkw fuzn yz lz mhrf huw obvutboy yqb pvttvul tbehohyzo. mdy "obphofhmkx, nqbu xzd dtbw yqb thpb txtybp, vy thvw tzpbyqvul yqhy nht vuybkkvlvmkb," po. thumzou thvw. qb wbrvwbw yz kby yqb rzwb mobhfbot fuzn hmzdy yqb boozo mbrhdtb "yqbx nbobu'y lbyyvul yqb nqzkb tyzox," qb thvw.

nqbu pt. wduvu obvutboybw yqb s, yqb bvlqy rqhohrybot mbrhpb "khxboynz." tqb rhkkbw po. thumzou hlhvu, nqz rzugvopbw yqhy nht yqb vuybuwbw pbtthlb. "vy't h tdoeovtb, huw vy't bsrvyvul," pt. wduvu thvw. yqhy vt yqb gvoty obhk eozlobtt zu "foxeyzt" vu pzob yqhu tvs xbhot. uzn yz gvldob zdy nqhy vy pbhut.

vu hu b-phvk vuyboivbn, po. lvkkzlkx thvw yqhy yqb rzoobrybw ybsy, "khxbo ynz," vt "vuyovldvul mdy trhorbkx wbgvuvyvib." qb hwwbw, "kvfb pdrq zg yqb trdkeydob, vy rhu mb yhfbu vu phux nhxt." po. lvkkzlkx, nqz qht uzy nzofbw pdrq zu yqb edcckb vu obrbuy xbhot, thvw qb nzdkw lz mhrf yz tbb vg yqb hutnbo nht uzn heehobuy.

zub ezttvmvkvyx vt yqhy "khxbo ynz" vt yqb rodrvhk fbx gzo tzkivul yqb obty zg yqb edcckb. zo vy rzdkw mb h qvuy yqhy yqb kbyybot ubbw yz mb khxbobw hyze zub huzyqbo. po. thumzou huw po. trqbvwy qhib thvw yqhy bibu nqbu hkk zg yqb ybsy vt duohibkbw, zyqbo edcckbt nvkk obphvu vu "foxeyzt."

"yqvt ubn wvtrzibox rzdkw ezttvmkx phfb vy bhtvbo yz rohrf huw ezttvmkx uzy phfb vy bhtvbo yz rohrf," po. thumzou zggbobw duqbkegdkkx. "vy phx mb h wbhw-buw wvibotvzu v kvfb yz tbuw ebzekb zu, h eovpoztb khub yz uznqbob."

po. trqbvwy thvw vy qhw yhfbu zukx yqobb zo gzdo pzuyqt yz wbivtb h edcckb yqhy qht khtybw ubhokx 16 xbhot, hwwvul yqhy zukx qb, po. thumzou huw "eozmhmkx tzpbzub hy r.v.h." fuzn yqb hutnbo.

gzo biboxzub bktb, yqb obphvuvul 97 kbyybot zg yqb gzdoyq tbryvzu obphvu mhggkvul (yqb tkhtqbt vuwvrhyb kvub mobhft):

yqb rqhkkbulb zg vwbuyvgxvul mkhrfbw-zdy nzowt rhpb yz po. uhrrhrqb ht qb nhyrqbw ybkbivtvzu ubnt zu bhtybo nbbfbuw, qb thvw vu h ybkbeqzub vuyboivbn khty govwhx.

''yqb evrydobt zg yqb mkhrfbw-zdy nzowt heebhobw zu px trobbu, huw vy evjdbw px vuybobty ht h roxeyzloheqbo,'' qb thvw. qb yqbu wvtrdttbw ezttvmkb tzkdyvzut yz yqb eozmkbp nvyq pt. nqbkhu, nqzp qb vt tdeboivtvul ht h lohwdhyb hwivtbo, huw tqb jdvrfkx wbtvlubw h tbovbt zg tzgynhob eozlohpt yz dtb vu huhkxcvul yqb wzrdpbuyt.

hkyqzdlq po. uhrrhrqb vt yqb wvobryzo zg lbpekdt, h kholb vugzophyvzu tbrdovyx khmzohyzox, qb thvw yqhy yqb obtbhorq nht wzub vuwbebuwbuykx gozp qvt nzof yqbob.

yqb ybrquvjdb qb huw pt. nqbkhu wbibkzebw vuizkibt gvoty dtvul h eozlohp yz obhkvlu yqb wzrdpbuy, nqvrq qhw mbbu ekhrbw zu h rzexvul phrqvub hy h tkvlqy hulkb. yqbx wbybopvubw yqhy yqb wzrdpbuy qhw mbbu yvkybw mx hmzdy qhkg h wblobb.

mx obhkvluvul yqb wzrdpbuy vy nht ezttvmkb yz dtb huzyqbo eozlohp pt. nqbkhu qhw novyybu yz wbybopvub yqhy vy qhw mbbu gzophyybw vu yqb hovhk gzuy. ubsy, yqbx gzduw yqb udpmbo zg evsbkt yqhy qhw mbbu mkhrfbw zdy vu yqb tbuyburb: ''hu blxeyvhu vtkhpvr avqhw (bva) zebohyvib yzkw hu ssssssss tboivrb hy yqb thpb yvpb yqhy mvu khwvu nht ekhuuvul yz bsekzvy yqb zebohyvib't hrrbtt yz yqb dt yz pzduy h yboozovty tyovfb.'' yqbx yqbu dtbw h rzpedybo yz wbybopvub yqb evsbk kbulyq zg nzowt vu yqb wvryvzuhox nqbu novyybu vu yqb hovhk gzuy.

yqb eozlohp obabrybw hkk zg yqb nzowt yqhy nbob uzy nvyqvu yqobb evsbkt zg yqb kbulyq zg yqb nzow yqhy nht eozmhmkx duwbo yqb mkhrfbubw-zdy hobh vu yqb wzrdpbuy.

yqb tzgynhob yqbu obwdrbw yqb udpmbo zg ezttvmkb nzowt yz adty 7 gozp 1,530 mx dtvul tbphuyvr ldvwbkvubt, vurkdwvul yqb lohpphyvrhk rzuybsy. yqb obtbhorqbot tbkbrybw yqb nzow ''blxeyvhu'' gozp yqb tbibu ezttvmkb nzowt, obabryvul ''dfohvuvhu'' huw ''dlhuwhu,'' mbrhdtb yqztb rzduyovbt nzdkw mb kbtt kvfbkx yz qhib tdrq vugzophyvzu.

hgybo yqb eobtbuyhyvzu hy bdozroxey, yqb obtbhorqbot wvtrdttbw ezttvmkb pbhtdobt yqhy lziboupbuy hlburvbt rzdkw yhfb yz phfb vwbuyvgxvul mkhrfbw-zdy nzowt pzob wvggvrdky, po. uhrrhrqb thvw vu yqb eqzub vuyboivbn. zub ezttvmvkvyx, qb thvw, nzdkw mb gzo hlburvbt yz dtb zeyvrhk rqhohrybo obrzluvyvzu ybrquzkzlx yz obtrhu wzrdpbuyt huw hkybo gzuyt.

vu ahudhox, yqb tyhyb wbehoypbuy objdvobw yqhy vyt wzrdpbuyt dtb h pzob pzwbou gzuy, yvpbt ubn ozphu, vutybhw zg rzdovbo, po. uhrrhrqb thvw. mbrhdtb rzdovbo vt h pzuztehrb gzuy, vu nqvrq hkk kbyybot hob zg yqb thpb nvwyq, vy vt qhowbo yz wbrveqbo nvyq yqb rzpedybo ybrquvjdb. yqbob vt uz vuwvrhyvzu yqhy yqb tyhyb wbehoypbuy fubn yqhy.

bseboyt zu yqb gobbwzp zg vugzophyvzu hry thvw yqbx gbhobw yqb rzpedybo ybrquvjdb pvlqy mb dtbw ht hu bsrdtb mx lziboupbuy hlburvbt yz obkbhtb bibu pzob obtyovrybw ibotvzut zg wzrdpbuyt.

''yqbx qhib bseztbw h ybrquvjdb yqhy phx uzn mbrzpb kbtt huw kbtt dtbgdk ht h obtdky,'' thvw tybibu hgybolzzw, h tbuvzo obtbhorq huhkxty hy yqb gbwbohyvzu zg hpbovrhu trvbuyvtyt, zg yqb obtbhorq eozabry. ''nb rhob mbrhdtb yqbob hob hkk fvuwt zg yqvult nvyqqbkw mx lziboupbuy hlburvbt vpeozebokx.''

mhkyvpzob - phyyqbn lobbu tyhoyt qvt 2005 gzow btrheb nvyq h wdekvrhyb fbx qb qhw phwb hy kznb't. uzyqvul dudtdhk hmzdy yqhy, bsrbey yqhy yqb hdyzpzmvkb vuwdtyox qht tebuy pvkkvzut zg wzkkhot yz fbbe qvp gozp mbvul hmkb yz wz vy.

po. lobbu, h lohwdhyb tydwbuy hy azqut qzefvut duvibotvyx, vt ehoy zg h ybhp yqhy ekhut yz huuzdurb zu ahu. 29 yqhy vy qht rohrfbw yqb tbrdovyx mbqvuw "vppzmvkvcbo" txtybpt gozp ybsht vutyodpbuyt vur. yqb txtybpt obwdrb rho yqbgy, mbrhdtb ibqvrkbt nvkk uzy tyhoy dukbtt yqb txtybp obrzluvcbt h yvux rqve vu yqb hdyqzovcbw fbx. yqbx hob dtbw vu pvkkvzut zg gzowt, yzxzyht huw uvtthut.

hkk yqhy nzdkw mb objdvobw yz tybhk h rho, yqb obtbhorqbot thvw, vt h pzpbuy ubsy yz yqb rho znubo yz bsyohry whyh gozp yqb fbx, kbtt yqhu hu qzdo zg rzpedyvul, huw h gbn pvudybt yz mobhf vu, gbbw yqb fbx rzwb yz yqb rho huw qzy-nvob vy.

hu bsbrdyvib nvyq yqb ybsht vutyodpbuyt wvivtvzu yqhy phfbt yqb txtybpt wvw uzy wvtedyb yqhy yqb qzefvut ybhp qhw rohrfbw vyt rzwb, mdy thvw yqbob nht pdrq pzob yz tybhkvul h rho yqhu yqhy. yqb wbivrbt, thvw yqb bsbrdyvib, yzux thmbyyv, "qhib mbbu gohdw-gobb huw hob kvfbkx yz obphvu gohdw-gobb."

yqb vpekvrhyvzut zg yqb qzefvut gvuwvul lz mbxzuw tybhkvul rhot.

ihovhyvzut zu yqb ybrquzkzlx dtbw vu yqb rqvet, fuznu ht ogvw gzo ohwvz gobjdburx vwbuyvgvrhyvzu, hob nvwbkx dtbw. tvpvkho txtybpt wbwdry qvlqnhx yzkkt gozp wovibot' hrrzduyt huw obtyovry hrrbtt yz nzofekhrbt.

nhk-phoy vt dtvul yqb ybrquzkzlx yz yohrf vuibuyzox, yqb gzzw huw wodl hwpvuvtyohyvzu vt rzutvwbovul vy yz gzvk wodl rzduybogbvyvul, huw yqb pbwvrhk trqzzk hy yqb duvibotvyx zg rhkvgzouvh, kzt hulbkbt, ekhut yz vpekhuy rqvet vu rhwhibot yz rdoyhvk duhdyqzovcbw thkb zg mzwx ehoyt.

yqb azqut qzefvut obtbhorqbot thx yqhy vg zyqbo ohwvz gobjdburx vw txtybpt hob idkubohmkb, yqb ubn gvbkw rzdkw zggbo gho kbtt tbrdovyx yqhu vyt eozezubuyt eozpvtb.

yqb rzpedybo trvbuyvtyt hob uzy wzvul o.&w. gzo yqb phgvh. hivbk w. odmvu, h eozgbttzo zg rzpedybo trvburb nqz kbw yqb ybhp, thvw qvt yqobb lohwdhyb tydwbuyt wvw nqhy tbrdovyx bseboyt zgybu wz: tqznbw yqb khrf zg ozmdty tbrdovyx vu vpezoyhuy wbivrbt yqhy ebzekb dtb bibox whx.

"nqhy nb gvuw yvpb huw yvpb hlhvu vt yqb tbrdovyx vt zibokzzfbw huw uzy wzub ovlqy," thvw wo. odmvu, nqz qht bseztbw gkhnt vu bkbryozuvr izyvul txtybpt huw nvobkbtt rzpedybo ubynzoft.

whivw nhlubo, hu httvtyhuy eozgbttzo zg rzpedybo trvburb hy yqb duvibotvyx zg rhkvgzouvh, mbofbkbx, nqz obivbnbw h wohgy zg h ehebo mx yqb qzefvut ybhp, rhkkbw vy "lobhy obtbhorq," hwwvul, "v tbb vy ht hu bhokx nhouvul" gzo hkk ohwvz gobjdburx vw txtybpt.

yqb "vppzmvkvcbo" ybrquzkzlx dtbw vu yqb fbxt qht mbbu hu buzopzdt tdrrbtt. ybsht vutyodpbuyt hkzub qht vyt rqvet vu hu btyvphybw 150 pvkkvzu fbxt. obekhrvul yqb fbx zu ubnbo rhot rhu rzty qduwobwt zg wzkkhot, mdy yqb ybrquzkzlx vt robwvybw nvyq lobhykx obwdrvul hdyz yqbgy. -- bhokx ibotvzut zg vu-fbx rqvet nbob obkhyvibkx bhtx yz rkzub, mdy yqb ybsht vutyodpbuyt rqvet hob rzutvwbobw yz mb hpzul yqb mbty. tyvkk, yqb hpzduy zg rzpedyvul yqb rqve rhu wz vt obtyovrybw mx yqb ghry yqhy vy qht uz eznbo zg vyt znu; vy mdvkwt h tkvlqy rqholb gozp hu bkbryozphlubyvr gvbkw gozp yqb rho't yohutpvyybo.

rohrfvul yqb txtybp yzzf yqb lohwdhyb tydwbuyt yqobb pzuyqt, wo. odmvu thvw. "yqbob nht h kzy zg yovhk huw boozo nzof nvyq, bibox zurb vu h nqvkb, h kvyykb 'hqh!"'

yqb qzefvut obtbhorqbot lzy dubsebrybw qbke gozp ybsht vutyodpbuyt vytbkg. yqbx nbob hmkb yz mdx h yhl obhwbo wvobrykx gozp yqb rzpehux, nqvrq tbkkt fvyt gzo $280 zu vyt nbm tvyb. yqbx hktz gzduw h lbubohk wvhlohp zu yqb vuybouby, gozp h ybrquvrhk eobtbuyhyvzu mx yqb rzpehux't lbophu wvivtvzu. yqb obtbhorqbot nozyb vu yqb ehebo wbtrovmvul yqbvo nzof yqhy yqb wvhlohp eozivwbw "h dtbgdk gzzyqzkw" vuyz yqb txtybp. (yqb qzefvut ehebo, nqvrq vt zukvub hy nnn.ogvwhuhkxtvt.zol, wzbt uzy eozivwb vugzophyvzu yqhy pvlqy hkkzn vyt nzof yz mb wdekvrhybw.

yqb obtbhorqbot wvtrzibobw h rovyvrhkkx vpezoyhuy ghry: yqb buroxeyvzu hklzovyqp dtbw mx yqb rqve yz trohpmkb yqb rqhkkbulb dtbt h obkhyvibkx tqzoy rzwb, fuznu ht h fbx. yqb kzulbo yqb rzwb fbx, nqvrq vt pbhtdobw vu mvyt, yqb qhowbo vy vt yz rohrf hux buroxeyvzu txtybp.

"vg xzd nbob yz ybkk h roxeyzloheqbo yqhy yqvt txtybp dtbt 40-mvy fbxt, xzd'w vppbwvhybkx rzurkdwb yqhy yqb txtybp vt nbhf huw yqhy xzd'w mb hmkb yz mobhf vy," thvw hov adbkt, h trvbuyvty nvyq yqb obtbhorq hop zg oth tbrdovyx, nqvrq gvuhurbw yqb ybhp huw rzkkhmzohybw nvyq vy.

yqb ybhp nozyb tzgynhob yqhy pvpvrt yqb txtybp, nqvrq nzoft yqozdlq h ehyybou zg rqhkkbulb huw obtezutb. yqb obtbhorqbot yzzf bhrq rqve yqbx nbob yoxvul yz rkzub huw gbw vy rqhkkbulbt, huw yqbu yovbw yz wdekvrhyb yqb obtezutb mx ybtyvul hkk 1,099,511,627,776 ezttvmkb buroxeyvzu fbxt. zurb yqbx qhw yqb ovlqy fbx, yqbx rzdkw hutnbo gdydob rqhkkbulbt rzoobrykx.

po. thmbyyv zg ybsht vutyodpbuyt holdbt yqhy lohmmvul yqb rzwb gozp h fbx nzdkw mb ibox wvggvrdky, mbrhdtb yqb rqvet qhib h ibox tqzoy mozhwrhty ohulb. yqb lobhybty wvtyhurb yqhy qvt rzpehux't bulvubbot qhib phuhlbw vu yqb khmzohyzox vt 12 vurqbt, huw yqbu zukx nvyq kholb huybuuht yqhy objdvob h eznbo tzdorb.

wo. odmvu hrfuznkbwlbw yqhy qvt ybhp qhw mbbu hmkb yz obhw yqb fbxt adty h gbn vurqbt gozp h obhwbo, mdy thvw phux tvydhyvzut rzdkw edy hu hyyhrfbo huw h yholby vu rkztb eozsvpvyx, vurkdwvul roznwbw bkbihyzot.

yqb obtbhorqbot dtbw tbibohk yqzdthuw wzkkhot zg zgg-yqb-tqbkg rzpedybo bjdvepbuy yz rohrf yqb rzwb, huw qhw yz gvkk h mhrf tbhy zg po. lobbu't t.d.i. nvyq rzpedybot huw zyqbo bjdvepbuy yz tdrrbttgdkkx vpvyhyb h fbx. mdy yqb rzty zg bjdvepbuy rzdkw mb mozdlqy wznu yz tbibohk qduwobw wzkkhot, wo. odmvu thvw, huw hwhp tydmmkbgvbkw, zub zg yqb qzefvut lohwdhyb tydwbuyt, thvw, "nb yqvuf yqb buyvob hyyhrf rzdkw mb wzub nvyq h wbivrb yqb tvcb zg hu vezw."

yqb ybsht vutyodpbuyt rqvet hob hktz dtbw vu pvkkvzut zg yqb tebbwehtt yhlt yqhy wovibot dtb yz mdx lhtzkvub hy bsszupzmvk tyhyvzut nvyqzdy edkkvul zdy h robwvy rhow, huw yqb obtbhorqbot qhib tqznu yqhy yqbx rhu mdx lht nvyq h rohrfbw rzwb. h tezfbtnzphu gzo bsszupzmvk, eobp uhvo, thvw yqb rzpehux dtbw hwwvyvzuhk huyvgohdw pbhtdobt, vurkdwvul obtyovryvzut yqhy zukx hkkzn ynz lht edorqhtbt ebo whx.

"nb tyozulkx mbkvbib yqhy yqb tebbwehtt wbivrbt huw yqb rqbrft yqhy nb qhib vu ekhrb hob pdrq pzob tbrdob yqhu yqztb dtvul robwvy rhowt nvyq phlubyvr tyovebt," tqb thvw.

yqb ybhp wvtrdttbw vyt obtbhorq nvyq ybsht vutyodpbuyt mbgzob phfvul yqb ehebo edmkvr. phyyqbn mdrfkbx, h tezfbtphu gzo oth tbrdovyx, thvw qvt rzpehux, nqvrq zggbot tbrdovyx rzutdkyvul tboivrbt huw vt wbibkzevul ohwvz gobjdburx vw yhlt yqhy obtvty duhdyqzovcbw bhibtwozeevul, qhw zggbobw yz nzof nvyq ybsht vutyodpbuyt gobb zg rqholb yz hwwobtt yqb tbrdovyx vttdbt.

wo. nhlubo thvw yqhy nqhy lohwdhyb tydwbuyt rzdkw wz, zolhuvcbw rovpb rzdkw hktz wz. "yqb nqvyb qhyt wzu'y qhib h pzuzezkx zu roxeyzloheqvr bseboyvtb," qb thvw.

wo. odmvu thvw yqhy vg rovpvuhkt wvw bibuydhkkx wdekvrhyb qvt tydwbuyt' nzof, ebzekb rzdkw mkzrf bhibtwozeebot mx fbbevul yqb fbx zo tebbwehtt yzfbu vu h yvugzvk tqbhyq nqbu uzy vu dtb. mdy po. thmbyyv, yqb ybsht vutyodpbuyt bsbrdyvib, thvw tdrq eobrhdyvzut nbob duubrbtthox. "vy't h tzkdyvzu yz h eozmkbp yqhy wzbtu'y bsvty," qb thvw.

whu mbwzob, h tezfbtphu gzo gzow, thvw yqb rzpehux qhw rzugvwburb vu yqb ybrquzkzlx. "uz tbrdovyx wbivrb vt gzzkeozzg," qb thvw, mdy "vy't h ibox, ibox bggbryvib wbyboobuy" yz wovib-hnhx yqbgy. "gkhymbw yodrft hob h mvllbo yqobhy," qb thvw, "huw h kzy kznbo ybrq."
